

                The System Configuration Gordian Knot



Introduction


Typical systems often contain over 1000 installed packages, with about
twice as many textual configuration files residing in /etc. System
administration tools to manage these dissimilar files hardly achieve
their goals. Tools such as webmin or linuxconf suffer from the fact that
they constantly need to adjust to small changes in configuration file
formats and locations.  Moreover, they cannot accomodate easily
inherited configuration parameters to simplify the configuration of
multiple similar systems. Other tools have been developed for updating
the configuration for groups of machines, including cfengine and hand
tailored solutions with configuration files processed through the m4
preprocessor and redistributed with rdist.


Yet, in newer systems without legacy problems, the management of
configuration information is being solved nicely. A few recent systems,
in production today, are worth mentioning.


The GNOME Configuration System consists in an API/library used by programs to
get/set configuration information and receive notification, a daemon
to access and cache the configuration entries and perform notification, and
storage backends to read/write the configuration data from XML files
or other sources. It is used for GNOME desktop applications configuration.
Many configuration sources may be stacked, to allow for default, user,
and mandatory settings. Other levels may be added, like a ¨department default¨
level between the user and default level.


The KDE desktop uses a simular system named kconfig.


Debconf is another similar system, but closer to system administration.
It is mostly used for installation time configuration data and thus only
manages a small subset of the configuration information. Perhaps it could
be used to manage even more configuration informations than it is currently.
Most noteworthy is the highly successfull distributed aspect of it.
Unlike in Webmin or Linuxconf, each package maintainer provides and
updates the necessary interface between the package and the configuration
system.


Darwin/Mac OS X supports XML property lists to store configuration data and
make it available through a well defined API. The configd daemon is used
for notification.



The emerging architecture


Quite clearly there is a general trend towards structured configuration
data, in XML files or SQL/LDAP databases, available through a simple API
enabling multiple stacked sources. This simplifies system applications by
removing all these custom configuration data parsers. It also allows
configuration parameters inheritance which can simplify managing similar
systems in a department, in a cluster, or even for diskless stations sharing
a common NFS root (the topmost source would be selected based on the IP
or Ethernet address).


The architecture is composed of an API through which applications query
and get/set/add/remove configuration parameters. The API should allow for
for variable length lists (e.g., users in the password file) and different
merging modes among stacked sources (e.g., list of panel applets which should
be either merged with or replace those from other sources). Furthermore,
negative entries may be helpful, when a higher level source needs to
mask (remove) an entry from a lower level source.


Computed entries is something else to consider. Often, several parameters
depend on another parameter (netmask and dhcp dynamic range which depend
on the host/network IP address). The dependencies must be tracked properly
to insure correct updates and notification. This is similar to spreadsheet
cells which may contain either a value or a formula. To specify a computed
entry, a script file name or a script function could be entered.


This API is implemented by a library connecting to the configuration
daemon. Change notification could be sent to the application as an asynchronous
message, a SIGHUP signal, or a SIGTERM leading to a full restart.


The configuration daemon should be able to connect to several different
configuration sources stacked from highest (mandatory) to lowest priority
(default) settings. Each source may use a different access mechanism
(XML file, LDAP, SQL database...) implemented by a corresponding backend,
all implementing an API similar to the client API. As an optimisation, it
could be helpful to have each source specify the configuration hierarchy
subtree for which it contains entries. A backend which reads the existing
/etc text files could be implemented, perhaps using the text to/from XML
scripts provided in the Gnome Setup Tools.


Finally, a configuration editor would use that API and allow viewing and
editing the configuration parameters hierarchy. It could use a generic
interface connected to several frontend (GTK, Web, Texte). A challenge is
to clearly show which source provides which data element and where
modifications will be written. It may be sufficient to simply change the
sources stack (even looking at one at a time), see the effect, and assume
that the topmost source is written to.


Most existing configuration tools (e.g., Linuxconf, Webmin) have
specific UI controls/druid designed for the various tasks. Is it possible
to have only a generic interface to do the same job as efficiently?
The computed values and the notification mechanisms may alleviate the
need for most of the specific per subsystem configuration work often performed.


Since the proposed API would closely resemble gconf and debconf, it could
be possible to provide gateways such that gconf/debconf sources may be used by
the new API and gconf/debconf tools could use the new sources.



Possible Transitions


Until all major applications use the new API and all configuration
data is stored in structured databases (e.g., XML or LDAP), adapters
to simplify the transition may be provided. A text backend would allow
using the configuration editor, while the application still uses the
text file (thus without the benefits of stacked sources). The text
backend could be used as a converter from text to other formats like
XML.


The other way around, an adapter may be used to replace text configuration
files for a yet unmodified application, thus providing the multi-source
benefits of the configuration system. The adapter needs to intercept
openings of /etc files. At user level this may be done by an
LD_PRELOAD library replacing the open (and perhaps readdir, stat...) and
returning a file descriptor to a pipe instead of to a real file.
The pipe would be connected to an application using the
configuration API and receiving or sending the normal textual content to
the application. This would require associations between /etc files
and configuration API adapters. It could be a simple convention checked by the
LD_PRELOAD open: opening a file in /etc being a symbolic link to an executable
script in /usr/lib/ConfigAdapters, is replaced by a popen on that file.



Where to go first


A simple, flexible and low overhead system is needed but above all the
challenge is the migration of these thousands of applications with text based
configuration files. Fortunately, most systems are customized by modifying
only a small number of configuration files, typically 10 on a simple client,
20 on a simple server and 30 on a more elaborate server. Frequently modified
configuration files and associated applications include the following.


/etc/network/interfaces (ifupdown)
/etc/hostname (/etc/init.d/hostname.sh in sysvinit)
/etc/firewall (/etc/init.d/firewall)
/etc/lilo.conf (lilo)
/etc/group (nsswitch)
/etc/cups/client.conf (cups)
/etc/fstab (mount, umount, swapon/getmnt in libc)
/etc/passwd (nsswitch)
/etc/shadow (nsswitch)
/etc/sane.d/plustek.conf (sane)
/etc/X11/XF86Config-4 (Xserver)
/etc/modules (/etc/init.d/modutils)
/etc/inittab (init in sysvinit)
/etc/dhcpd.conf (dhcpd)
/etc/apt/sources.list (apt)
/etc/hosts (nsswitch)
/etc/gdm/gdm.conf (gdm)
/etc/apache/httpd.conf (apache)
/etc/postfix/* (postfix)


It is thus possible to migrate the applications one by one, until
enough are converted to insure that most stations may be customized
simply through the inheritable configuration sources. In the files
mentioned, several are already accessed through an API (group, passwd,
shadow, hosts) which could be used as wrapper to the new system, a few
are only used from easy to modify scripts (hostname, firewall,
modules), at least one is already managed by debconf (XF86Config-4),
leaving a few frequently used configuration files requiring more work
(interfaces, lilo, cups, fstab, inittab, dhcpd.conf, sources.list,
gdm.conf, httpd.conf, postfix, sane).



Possible Tasks


- Develop the client and backend API. The two would be very similar except
  perhaps that the client API may allow knowing or specifying the
  configuration sources. A simple, flexible and efficient API/library, daemon,
  and simple backend with minimal requirements is essential.


- Implement text backends. Somewhat sidesteps the configuration system and
  brings limited benefits. (Low priority).


- Implement text file to API LD_PRELOAD wrapper. This is probably simpler than
  trying to modify the applications without the original author consent. It
  immediately brings the full benefits of the configuration system.


- Configuration editor. While the editor may be refined over time, it is
  an important component for the acceptance of the system.